The late 1950s and early 1960s were a time of profoundgrowth for the civil rights movement in the United States.Although racial segregation in the public schools had been
outlawed in 1954, the ruling applied only to this one category ofdiscriminatory practice in U.s. society. But it furthered withinthe African-American community the anticipation of broaderchanges. lt was in this climate that the student sit-in
demonstrations of the early 1960s were born. The technique ofthe sit-in was simple—African Americans occupying "whitesonly" seats in racially segregated establishments-but this newtype of student activism galvanized established civil rights
organizations, brought about the creation of new ones, andgenerated support for the civil rights movement among manynew segments of the populace.
lnitiated by four students of the North Carolina Agriculturaland Technical College, the first sit-in occurred at a lunchcounter in February 1960. Sit-ins then spread rapidly throughthe southern U.s., involving over 70,000 participants by August1961.The sit-ins provided an important model for nonviolentprotest and showed students that they could affect the politicalprocess.The influence of these demonstrations on the
determination of the student activists was particularly visible intwo events: the formation of the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee, and the birth of a second form of sit-ins called Freedom Rides.
The formation of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee followed the first sit-in by just a few months and notonly solidified student involvement in the civil rights movementbut also placed students in leadership roles for the first time. Itoperated independently of other civil rights organizations andrelied on strong local leadership, helping to transform studentinvolvement from participation in small-scale protests into asustained effort to challenge discrimination throughout the U.s.But the development that marked the clearest turning point forthe civil rights movement was the Freedom Rides.The goal ofthe rides, which were organized in 1961 by the already well-established Congress of Racial Equality, was to challengesegregation through the occupation of "whites only" seats oninterstate buses and in facilities at the various terminals atwhich the buses stopped. Because the rides inspired violentreprisals in some regions, the u.s. government began usingforce to protect the safety of the Freedom Riders; this was thefirst government action taken explicitly in support of the causeof desegregation outside the public schools.The Freedom
Rides thus helped take the civil rights movement to a new levelby underscoring to the u.s. government, and to U.S. societygenerally, the harsh realities of the segregation system, and byproviding, for students and their elders alike, examples of themethods they might use to achieve a more equal society.

1. The primary purpose of the passage is to
A.describe how the successful use in the early 1960s of anew tactic to combat discriminatory social practices ledto the transformation of the U.S. civil rights movement
B.chronicle the activities of the U.s. civil rights movementduring the late 1950s and early 1960s that led to the firstuse by student activists of sit-in demonstrations
C.contrast various techniques and tactics used by u.S. civilrights organizations in the early 1960s to expose theinjustice of racial segregation and achieve a more equalsociety
D.Dargue that confrontational sit-in tactics were necessary in
order for the u.s. civil rights movement to make inroadsagainst racial discrimination in the late 1950s and early1960s
E.provide information on the extent to which the activities
of the U.s. civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960swere rooted in the earlier successes of the movement

2. According to the passage, the outlawing of segregation in the u.S. public schools in 1954 had which one of the followingconsequences?
A.lt led directly to the formation of the Student NonviolentCoordinating Committee.
B.lt served to encourage African Americans to expect similarchanges in other parts of society.
C.lt provided a useful example of a method students mightuse to achieve a more equal society.
D.lt dramatically concluded a period of profound growth inthe u.s. civil rights movement.
E.lt galvanized established U.S. civil rights organizationsand led immediately to the creation of new ones.

3. Based on the passage, which one of the following can be most reasonably inferred about the Freedom Rides?
A.They were primarily a spontaneous phenomenon.
B.They were directed against the u.s. government.
C.They were less important to the u.S. civil rights movementthan were the original sit-in demonstrations.
D.They were based on a different philosophy than the original sit-in demonstrations.
E. They were modeled on the original sit-in demonstrations.

4. The discussion of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in the third paragraph is intended primarily to
A.argue for the preeminence of a particular U.s. civil rightsorganization
B.serve as a contrast to discussion of the efforts of studentsit-in demonstrators
C.summarize the historical background against which theFreedom Rides flourished
D.describe an important outgrowth of the student sit-indemonstrations
E.explain why local sit-in demonstrations require nationally coordinated efforts

5. Which one of the following statements most accurately expresses the author's view in the passage regarding theFreedom Rides?
A.By exposing the harsh realities of the segregation system,the Freedom Rides induced the u.s.government to address segregation.
B.The Freedom Rides were the final contribution of studentactivists in their effort to defeat the segregation system.
C.The Freedom Rides introduced an entirely new techniqueinto the U.s. civil rights movement that served as a modelfor later protest.
D.Because the Freedom Rides provoked violent reprisals against demonstrators, they reversed earlier progress inthe cause of desegregation.
E.The Freedom Rides transformed a series of uncoordinated local student protests into a movement withnational scope.
